Now there's one thing I want to do to conclude the styling part and there, we'll use a relatively modern
CSS feature, CSS variables.
If you ever worked with Sass, you'll quickly know what CSS variables are, just that they're built into the
core CSS functionality and don't require a development environment compiler as Sass does.
So what's the idea behind CSS variables?
Well, we have all our nice sytlings in our tooltip here,
for example the background color when we have the important class on the host element.
Now sometimes, you want to take advantage of the default styling your elements set up but you still
want to customize it a bit,
let's say the background color here, when we have that important flag, should depend on a certain theme
we have in our application.
Now obviously what we always can do is we can go into the style definitions of our light DOM and we could
of course also say
any tooltip, so we use our tool selector, with the important class receives a background of green.
OK we can always do that and if we go back and reload, we have that green color here.
Now this doesn't work,
the problem with that just is we have to be totally aware of all the styles we set when the important
class is added
if we then want to overwrite it as we do it here.
Now here we know that the only thing we do with important inside of our custom element is that we set
the background but we could be doing all kinds of things there and it would be very inconvenient if we
as a developer had to drill into all the web components we're using to find out what they were doing
when we add a certain CSS class and we might know that they do something when we add a class in general
because we can find that in the documentation for the component let's say but we don't know all the
styles this component is applying. What we do know,
also because of the documentation for a component let's say, is that we can set a primary color and that
the component will then use that primary color
besides all other styles it might be setting which we don't want to touch and that is exactly where
CSS variables or CSS properties can help us.
We can go to our light DOM and instead of manually overwriting our style here like this, we can add a
CSS variable,
typically you do that inside of the special root selector which simply is like the root of your document.
Alternatively you could select HTML here in a HTML document and in there, you can add your own
custom variable with two dashes at the beginning and then any name you want, something like
color-primary and there, let's give this a light blue
maybe, let's see, let's pick this one
and now we just need to make sure that we use that in the component and in reality, it probably is the other
way around.
You are using a web component in your application and in the documentation of that web component, you
find the information that this component is able to read the color-primary CSS variable
let's say
and therefore when you set it in your light DOM, the tooltip can pick it up because in there, we just
happen to use that.
So instead of hardcoding the light gray here, we can use that variable and we do this with the special
var function which CSS understands and there, we now just have to use the same name, so
--color-primary.
If we do that and we save this, we can go back and reload and we now see this light blue style here
as a background but now this is fully customizable from inside the light DOM without us being required
to dig into the internals of our component and manually override that,
instead we can simply change the color in the light DOM in this variable and it will be picked up by the
styling inside of our component due to the way we use this CSS variable.
And if you want to learn more about CSS variables and CSS in general, don't hesitate to take my CSS
The Complete Guide Course of course,
this is a really neat feature when you want to implement something like theming or dynamic colors which
you can set from outside.
You are not restricted to colors by the way,
you can pass anything,
you could also have variables where you set some font sizes or padding dimensions,
so pixels, rems,
this is all possible and you can find an article with more information on CSS properties or variables
as I call them here attached to this lecture by the way in case you want to dive deeper, learn more about
them and learn more about browser support for this feature and so on.
This now gives us full functionality though and is an awesome way of enhancing our component.
There's just one other thing we can do here to make it even better, in cases where color-primary is not set,
let's say I'm not setting it here, I'm commenting it out in the light DOM, in such cases
we of course have no background color because we're trying to apply this variable here
but this variable does not exist so we can't extract the value from it. To handle such cases,
we can set up a default value in the place where we try to access the variable,
so in our custom component. We simply add a comma after the variable name
we're looking for
and then we provide a fallback value, like this light-gray.
And if we do that like this, now if I reload, we have the light gray
but if I were to override this in the light DOM by defining that variable the component is looking for,
if we do that, then this of course gets picked up.
So now we have the highest amount of flexibility we could possibly have for this styling thing.